# Hi-M protocol

*Hi-M: Direct and simultaneous observation of transcription and chromosome architecture in single-cells*



[TOC]

## Introduction

Genomes are folded in a hierarchical organization that reflects and contribute to regulating transcription and other processes[1](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/BU9Iy). However, our current understanding of chromatin architecture and how it is related to transcriptional regulation remains limited. In the last decade, two strategies became mainstream to study chromatin folding: chromosome conformation capture (3C and derivatives) and microscopy-based methods. 3C-like methods are powerful as they provide genome-wide information with kilobase (kb) resolution, but have several limitations: (1) most often they rely on population averaging, (2) they retrieve relative frequencies of pairwise interactions, (3) they have relatively low detection efficiency in single cells (<10% of the total contacts), (4) they are unable to provide spatial information (within the cell or the organism/ tissue), and (5) they do not permit simultaneous measurement of transcription and chromosome structure[2](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/s82m6). Microscopy-based strategies on the other hand, employ fluorescence *in situ* hybridization (FISH) to target specific loci and can access their 3D position inside the nucleus, but until very recently were limited to the detection of a small number of genomic locations (typically 3-4). We and others have recently overcame several of these limitations to reconstruct chromatin architecture and detect transcriptional status at the same time in single-cells while retaining spatial information. This new technology, that we termed Hi-M (high-throughput, high-resolution, high-coverage microscopy-based technology, see below), addresses these shortcomings by employing high-throughput synthesis of short oligonucleotide (oligo) probes combined with RNA labeling and multiple rounds of hybridization in a sequential imaging scheme enabling the measurement of transcriptional state and the localization of tens of different genomic loci within intact *Drosophila* embryos [3](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/93lWt). Similar approaches have also been employed in concurrent work [4–6](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/t7HLk+bsauh+LNJmY)**.**



### Principle of the method
Hi-M builds on recent innovations in FISH probe design based on high-throughput microarray oligos synthesis, namely Oligopaints [7,8](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/eKwJE+AfsuG) and on the pioneering design of multiplexing schemes for detecting hundreds of RNA species by imaging [9,10](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/T1jJ+P9Jo0). A microarray library with thousands of oligonucleotides (oligopool) is bioinformatically designed and commercially synthesized to target tens of different genomic locations. Each genomic locus (typically spanning 2-10 kb) is targeted by a unique set of 20-70 tiled oligos. We will refer to the genomic regions covered by these unique set of oligos as ‘barcodes’. Each oligo in a barcode contains three parts, a region of genomic homology, a barcode-specific readout sequence; and a priming region for PCR amplification (see Experimental design section). Labeling involves four steps. First, the oligopool library is enzymatically amplified and purified. Second, embryos are collected and fixed. Third, embryos are labeled by an RNA hybridization and signal amplification step. Fourth, the oligopool is hybridized to genomic DNA. After labeling, samples are mounted onto a microfluidic chamber connected to a microfluidics pump system and mounted into an automated widefield fluorescence microscope. In an initial round, DAPI and RNA signals are acquired in multiple regions of interest (ROIs). Then, the imaging of each barcode requires: (1) labeling of the sample with barcode-specific, fluorescently-labeled readout oligonucleotides (readout probes); (2) removal of unbound readout oligos by washing; (3) acquisition of 3D, two-color images for all ROIs and (4) photobleaching. This process is repeated sequentially for each barcode. In all sequential rounds, a second, spectrally different, fluorescent oligo is present and used as the fiducial barcode for drift correction. Next, images are processed to: segment DNA masks, determine the transcriptional status of each cell, retrieve the 3D position of each barcode in every ROI with sub-pixel accuracy, and correct drift during acquisition and between cycles of hybridization. Finally, the 3D coordinates of each barcode detected in each cell are used to reconstruct Hi-M matrices containing mean pairwise distances and absolute contact probabilities. 

### Applications of the method
 We have developed Hi-M to explore genome architecture and transcription in intact *Drosophila* embryos. However, Hi-M can be used in a large variety of model systems. For instance, adaptation to cultured cells should be straightforward. Cultured cells can be readily attached to the coverslip by standard procedures (e.g. by growing them in treated coverslips conductive of cell adhesion). In fact, cultured cells exhibit lower auto-fluorescence than organisms, thus the application of Hi-M should result in an increased barcode detection and localization precision. Hi-M could also be adapted to thick tissues and organoids by relying on cryo-sectioning [11](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/x0p3d) or on optical-sectioning. 	The RNA/DNA staining procedures described in this protocol are fully compatible with other imaging modalities, such as 3D Structured Imaging Microscopy (3D-SIM) or Stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM) [4,5](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/t7HLk+bsauh). The acquisition of super-resolution images is typically slower than for wide-field microscopy images, therefore limiting the throughput of a Hi-M acquisition. Thus, a compromise between resolution and throughput will have to be found depending on the problem under study. In addition, most super-resolution microscopies are not well adapted to thick specimens, thus their use in Hi-M will be mainly limited to thin samples. The flexibility afforded by Oligopaints in the design of probes would enable the adaptation of Hi-M to explore chromosome conformation at different length scales (e.g. chromosomal[12](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/oPkPn), compartment[5](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/bsauh) or TAD levels[3,6](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/93lWt+LNJmY)). In the present protocol, barcodes contain ~20-90 primary oligos and cover 2-10 kb to produce diffraction-limited spots and ensure excellent signal-to-noise ratios (SNR, defined as the maximum intensity of a spot divided by the standard deviation of the background). Labeling of smaller genomic regions is possible but at the expense of reduced SNR levels (i.e. reduced localization precision). 

### Limitations
 A current limitation of Hi-M is the time required for the acquisition of an entire dataset: typically 2-3 days to image 50-70 barcodes in 30 fields of view (representing ~50000 cells for *Drosophila* embryos). Thus, typically a balance between experimental time and the number of barcodes imaged needs to be found. For instance, 70 barcodes could be used to image an extended genomic region (e.g. 3.5 Mb) at low resolution (50 kb between barcodes), or to image a single genomic locus (e.g. 150kb) at high resolution (~2kb).A second limitation is the minimal number of primary probes per barcode. The values provided in this protocol (see Experimental Design section) ensure robust detection with high localization precision. A reduction in the number of primary probes could lead to decreased levels of detection and degraded localization precision. A possible future solution to this limitation may be to increase the number of imaging probes by encoding more readout probes per barcode (e.g. using SABER-FISH[13](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/1wUoK)), but ultimately this approach may limit the specificity of labeling. 	A third limitation is the reduced efficiency of barcode detection, currently close to 60-70%. Thus, a barcode is observed in only ~6-7 out of 10 nuclei. This entails a reduced number of cells containing all barcodes. A fourth limitation arises from the high cost of fluorescently-labeled oligos (~500$ each). As each barcode is detected by a specific fluorescently-labeled readout probe, the price of an experiment increases linearly with the number of barcodes. A new strategy that can considerably reduce the experimental cost has been recently described in two publications[6,14](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/LNJmY+76tSe). Instead of using a fluorescently labeled oligo for each barcode, a combination of two oligos is used: a non-fluorescent oligo specific for each barcode (bridge oligo) and a single fluorescent oligo common to all barcodes (imaging oligo). The bridge oligo contains 20 nucleotides (-nt) complementary to the barcode sequence, followed by a 10-nt “toehold” spacer sequence and a 20-nt sequence complementary to the imaging oligo[15](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/dhX77). With this design, the same fluorescently-labeled imaging oligo can be used to read all barcodes, with barcode specificity provided by the bridge oligo. Furthermore, this strategy can also be exploited to remove the fluorescence after each imaging cycle by the use of displacement oligos. Displacement oligos are complementary to the “toehold” and bridge probe sequences, therefore they displace the bridge probe from the barcode and in doing so they also remove the imaging probe. 	 A final limitation relies on the ability of Hi-M to detect several RNA species at once. The Hi-M protocol described here enables the simultaneous detection of chromosome conformation together with a single RNA species. In future, additional RNA species could be labeled by using a sequential TSA reaction with alternative conjugation molecules (e.g. biotin) or by relying on oligonucleotide-derivatized antibodies. It is worth noting that TSA amplification is non-linear, therefore quantification of RNA levels requires proper calibration. 

### Comparison with other methods
Compared to traditional FISH, Hi-M has two main advantages: (1) it uses oligo probes, that provide design flexibility and higher efficiency of labeling compared to double stranded BAC or amplicon-based probes[16,17](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/o4nBp+EKqZf), and (2) it employs a multiplexed approach that does not rely on the use of spectrally different fluorophores (limited to 2-4 in most applications). The overall strategy of Hi-M is conceptually similar to recent work employing sequential imaging schemes and oligopaint labeling [4–6,18](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/1gMnb+t7HLk+bsauh+LNJmY). The main differences with these studies are: (1) Hi-M enables simultaneous detection of RNA status and chromosome organization without sample unmounting and probe re-hybridization. Other approaches also enable RNA/DNA detection, but require the hybridization and imaging of RNA probes, unmounting of the sample followed by degradation of RNA, hybridization of DNA probes, and then remounting and imaging of the same cryo-sectioned samples[6](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/LNJmY); (2) Hi-M allows, in contrast with other studies [4–6](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/LNJmY+t7HLk+bsauh), for the imaging of entire, intact organisms. Multiplexing has also been recently achieved in the single-cell imaging of multiple RNA species [10,11,19,20](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/3JK9i+P9Jo0+x0p3d+YAS13). These studies used combinatorial schemes to target ~140[10,11](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/P9Jo0+x0p3d) to ~10,000 genes[19,20](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/3JK9i+YAS13) using only ~20 hybridization cycles. RNA is typically present in many copies per cell and these copies are spatially well separated, making it possible to decode species using combinatorial approaches. Currently, the use of combinatorial approaches to label DNA are limited by the spatial overlap of barcodes, the small number of DNA molecules detected (typically 1-4 depending on ploidy), and by the reduced efficiency of detection (~60%, see above). Excitingly, combinatorial approaches based on other principles[14](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/76tSe) may be usable in the near future to considerably increase the number of detected barcodes without a linear increase in the number of hybridization cycles.  	Hi-M and similar approaches based on FISH are carried out in fixed samples, thus they cannot provide dynamic information. Live imaging of single genomic loci has been achieved using a catalytically inactive Cas nuclease that is targeted to a loci by a small guide RNA (sgRNA) (for a review see[21](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/5iCtg)). Typically CRISPR-based imaging records the position of two genomic loci, although targeting up to 6 genomic loci has been achieved for repetitive sequences[22](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/2oCAK). Imaging non-repetitive sequences has been proven challenging due to the complexity of simultaneously co-expressing multiple sgRNA species in one cell. Furthermore, off-target binding and background fluorescence can further limit the application of current CRISPR-based imaging methods. More recently, a radically different approach successfully followed the 3D position of a single gene in real time while simultaneously monitoring mRNA synthesis in the same cell[23,24](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/ka4M5+wiweI) by combining stem-loop-based labeling (MS2 and/or PP7[25–27](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/MkFNI+PgjGy+pQ8LY)) and the ParS/ParB system[28](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/TlntC). This approach was used to study the position of a genomic locus and a transcription spot at the same time in living *Drosophila* embryos[24](https://paperpile.com/c/sV3Foj/wiweI). This approach requires genetic manipulation to introduce ectopic sequences, and is limited at present to a maximum of two colors (typically a transcript and a genomic locus).


